he insulin receptor substrate (IRS) proteins act as
important mediators of insulin action. Their regulation serves to
augment the speci¢city of the insulin signalling cascade. They
can be regulated ^ both positively and negatively ^ at the level
of phosphorylation, and signalling through these proteins can be
further modulated through the actions of SOCS (suppressor of
cytokine signalling) proteins. Understanding the mechanisms of
IRS regulation will provide further insight into the pathophysiology of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.
' 2003 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. on behalf of the
Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
Key words: Insulin; Signalling; IRS; SOCS; Phosphorylation

1. Introduction
Classical receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signalling is initiated by ligand-induced receptor dimerisation and autophosphorylation. Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues within a
speci¢c consensus sequence of the receptors was early recognised to provide docking sites for Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing signalling proteins such as PI3K (phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase), PLCQ, RasGAP, Grb2, and others. This
mode of signal transmission is utilised by several receptors,
including EGFR, PDGFR, FGFR, the Met receptor and Trk.
In addition, signalling from the above receptors is in part
mediated by recruitment of docking proteins, including
FRS2K and L, Gab1 and 2, and LAT. The signalling output
is thus determined by the recruitment of signalling proteins to
both the receptor and the various docking proteins [1]. However, not all receptors conform to this mechanism. Although
the insulin and insulin-like growth factor receptors (IR,
IGFR) belong to the RTK superfamily, signal transmission
by these receptors mainly occurs via the insulin receptor substrate (IRS) adapter proteins (IRS-1 to -4). These adapter

*Corresponding author. Fax: (33)-4938 15432.
E-mail address: vanobbeg@unice.fr (E. Van Obberghen).
Abbreviations: RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; SH2, Src homology 2;
IRS, insulin receptor substrate; IR, insulin receptor; IGF-1R, insulinlike growth factor-1 receptor; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase;
AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; PKB, protein kinase B;
SOCS, suppressor of cytokine signalling; TNF, tumour necrosis factor

proteins bind to the transphosphorylated activated receptors
at tyrosine docking sites, are themselves phosphorylated, and
in turn recruit SH2 domain-containing signalling molecules to
form the productive signalling complex [2].
The involvement of the IRS proteins in insulin and IGF
receptor signalling provides possibly tighter regulation of the
¢nal response. Thus, while regulation of the signal initiated by
the EGF and PDGF-receptors is mainly modulated by the
opposite action of the respective agonist versus phosphotyrosine phosphatases (terminating the phosphotyrosine^SH2 domain interaction), internalisation/recycling of the receptor and
in part downregulation of the receptor’s tyrosine kinase activity by serine phosphorylation [3], supplementary mechanisms
have been reported to act upon the control of IRS molecules.
Most notably, serine/threonine (S/T) phosphorylation mediated by several protein kinases has been shown to modulate
^ both positively and negatively ^ signal transmission via IRS,
while interaction with SOCS (suppressor of cytokine signalling) proteins provides a further mechanism of attenuating
IRS signalling. Understanding how the action of IRS molecules is coordinated during insulin signalling is of particular
interest as deregulation of these molecular events has been
demonstrated to be associated with (and even causative of)
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. We review here the
recent progress in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms modulating the action of IRS proteins.
2. Modulation of IRS protein action via serine/threonine
phosphorylation
2.1. Negative modulation
Initial observations indicated that treatment of isolated soleus muscle and 3T3 adipocytes with okadaic acid (a general
inhibitor of serine/threonine phosphatases) reduced insulinstimulated, IRS-1-associated PI3K activity and glucose transport while not a¡ecting the receptor’s activity [4]. Moreover,
co-expression in IR-expressing CHO cells of the phospholipidand calcium-activated protein kinase C interfered with insulin
signalling by inhibiting tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-1 and
its subsequent binding to PI3K [5]. These data provided the
¢rst indication that increased S/T phosphorylation of IRS
proteins could a¡ect insulin action. Subsequently, the observation that tumour necrosis factor K (TNFK) and chronic
hyperinsulinemia ^ two inducers of insulin resistance ^ trigger
increased S/T phosphorylation of IRS-1 and IRS-2 provided a
clue to a molecular basis of insulin resistance.

0014-5793 / 03 / $22.00 D 2003 Published by Elsevier Science B.V. on behalf of the Federation of European Biochemical Societies.
doi:10.1016/S0014-5793(03)00438-1

FEBS 27255 12-6-03 Cyaan Magenta Geel Zwart

A.M. Johnston et al./FEBS Letters 546 (2003) 32^36

The uncoupling of IRS proteins from productive insulin
signalling has been shown to depend on various mechanisms,
most likely acting in a concerted manner. It has been shown
that: (i) elevated S/T phosphorylation of IRS-1 and -2 inhibits
their binding to the juxtamembrane region of the activated
IR, impairing their ability to undergo tyrosine phosphorylation [6]; (ii) speci¢c phosphorylation of serine and threonine
residues adjacent to YxxM SH2 domain-binding motifs decreases the binding a⁄nity of the cognate molecule to the
phosphotyrosine [7]; and (iii) S/T phosphorylation commits
both IRS-1 and -2 to proteasomal degradation [8].
The search for the kinase(s) responsible for mediating IRS
protein S/T phosphorylation has been the focus of several
laboratories. Based on the fact that high IRS S/T phosphorylation leads to an insulin-resistant state, inhibition of such
kinase(s) would provide a possible means to reduce insulin
resistance. However, as detailed in Table 1, there are several
kinases that have been described to be potentially capable of
IRS-1 phosphorylation. Some of these actions are yet to be
con¢rmed in vivo, for example direct phosphorylation of IRS1 by PI3K in vivo has not been demonstrated. Given the
number of IRS-1-directed kinases, it is likely that each kinase
can partially contribute to the overall S/T phosphorylation
status of IRS-1, with the relative importance of each kinase
determined by its expression level in a given tissue, the cell
type, as well as its degree of activation (dependent on the
extracellular insulin-resistance-inducing stimuli, such as hyperinsulinemia, TNFK or other cytokines, glycated molecules,
fatty acids, etc.).
2.2. Positive modulation
While a broad consensus has emerged over the past 10
years regarding the negative regulatory function of S/T phosphorylation of IRS proteins, more recent data indicate that a
certain phosphoserine and phosphothreonine content on particular residues is necessary for a functional IRS protein. In
fact, in quiescent cells, basally phosphorylated IRS-1 and -2
display a certain degree of S/T phosphorylation and are readily tyrosine-phosphorylated by IR or IGF-1R upon stimulation with the respective agonist. However, in an in vitro system, fully dephosphorylated recombinant IRS-1 and IRS-2
undergo defective IR-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation, in-

33

Fig. 1. Modulation by S/T phosphorylation of the signalling potential of IRS-1. Tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-1 recruits heterodimeric
p85/p110 PI3K (and other signalling proteins such as Grb2, PLCQ,
SHP2, rasGAP, not shown here). IRS-1 tyrosine phosphorylation
and association with PI3K is positively regulated by AMPK and
PKB-mediated S/T phosphorylation (green arrows), negative regulation is mediated by PKCK and j, JNK1, TOR and GSK-3 (red arrows).

dicating that a basal S/T phosphorylation level is necessary
and promotes subsequent tyrosine phosphorylation by the
receptor [9]. In keeping with this observation are two recent
reports demonstrating that AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) (by phosphorylating S789) and protein kinase B
(PKB) (by phosphorylating serines 265, 302, 325 and 358)
exert a positive regulatory role by increasing the IRS-1-associated PI3K activity and tyrosine phosphorylation after insulin stimulation, respectively [6,10]. In Fig. 1, we summarise the
mode of activation and positive versus negative modulatory
action of the various IRS kinases described to date.
3. Animal models
Most of the research related to the identi¢cation of IRS-1
S/T kinases has been performed in cell culture systems which
are more amenable to biochemical investigation than in vivo
models. The ensuing challenge is to de¢ne the precise role that

Table 1
Summary of the protein S/T kinases demonstrated to function as IRS-1 kinases
Kinase
Inhibitory S/T phosphorylation
PKCK
MAPK
GSK-3
PKCj
JNK
TOR
PI3K
Rho kinase K
IKK
Casein kinase II
Activatory S/T phosphorylation
AMPK
PKB

Mode of activation

Phosphorylated residues

References

PMA, human glycated albumin
n.d.c
Insulin
Insulin
TNFK
TNFK
Insulin
Hypertension
TNFK
Insulin

S612, Rna
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
S307, Mm
S636, S639, Rn
n.d.
n.d.
S312, Hs
S99, T502, mM

[26]b
[27]
[28]
[29]
[11]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]

AICAR
Insulin

S789, Rn
S265, 302, 325, 358, Mm

[10]
[6]

The mode of activation and the speci¢c residues which are phosphorylated are indicated.
a
The numbering of S/T residues refers to the rat (Rn), mouse (Mm) or human (Hs) sequence.
b
Miele, C., Riboulet, A. et al., submitted.
c
Not determined.

FEBS 27255 12-6-03 Cyaan Magenta Geel Zwart

34

A.M. Johnston et al./FEBS Letters 546 (2003) 32^36

each of these kinases plays in the pathophysiology of insulin
resistance and diabetes. In this respect, the biochemical observation of inhibition of insulin action by JNK-mediated IRS-1
phosphorylation on S307 [11] has obtained physiological con¢rmation from a JNK1-de¢cient mouse model in which the
absence of JNK1 (i) leads to a decreased IRS-1 S307 phosphorylation, (ii) protects the genetically predisposed ob/ob
mice from developing obesity, and (iii) ameliorates all the
metabolic parameters associated with insulin resistance [12].
Similarly, mice lacking Akt-2/PKB2 display insulin resistance and a diabetes mellitus-like syndrome [13]; however,
this phenotype is likely generated by the absence of PKB
downstream signalling, and the contribution of the lack of
positive regulation of PKB still remains to be investigated.
With the recent availability of antibodies directed against speci¢c phosphorylated residues of IRS-1, rapid progress is likely
to occur towards our understanding of how each kinase contributes to the modulation of IRS-1 action in animal models.
4. Modulation of IRS protein action via interaction with
SOCS proteins
The SOCS family of proteins has been shown to play a
regulatory role in insulin signalling mediated, at least in
part, by e¡ects (direct and indirect) on IRS proteins. The
SOCS family of proteins boast similar structural characteristics, including a unique NH2-terminal domain of variable
length, a central SH2 domain and a COOH-terminal ‘SOCS
box’, with this structural resemblance re£ecting functional
similarities. Initial reports of the role of the SOCS proteins
showed them acting as negative regulators of cytokine action
via inhibition of JAK/STAT signalling. Subsequent work has
shown that, as one would expect from e⁄cient signalling modulators, they are capable of modulating signalling events at
di¡erent stages of the signal transduction process. Three
mechanisms have thus far been identi¢ed: (i) SOCS proteins
bind and inactivate Janus kinases (JAKs), (ii) they can impede
access of other crucial signal transduction mediators such as
STATs and SHP2 to receptor binding sites, (iii) more recent
evidence suggests that the ‘SOCS box’ acts as an adapter to
facilitate the ubiquitination of signalling proteins and their
subsequent targeting to the proteasome.
There is a growing body of evidence supporting the important role of the SOCS proteins in insulin signalling. In addition to being induced by insulin treatment in a number of
tissues and cell lines, SOCS-1, -2, -3 and -6 have been shown
to interact with the IR and IGFR in vitro, in vivo and in the
yeast-2-hybrid system [14^18]. Expression of SOCS-1, -3 and
-6 has been shown to have e¡ects on insulin-induced IRS-1^
p85 association and on activation of PKB, mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase and STAT5 [15,18,19]. How the SOCS
proteins achieve these e¡ects is under debate. One of the suggested mechanisms is through inhibition of IR activity,
although this observation remains somewhat controversial
[18]. The e¡ect of ectopic SOCS on the level of tyrosine phosphorylation of the IRS molecules, via the three canonical
mechanisms of inhibition is more clear, with extant demonstrations of the inhibition of JAK activity [20], inhibition via
competition with receptor binding sites [15] and induction of
proteosomal degradation (see Fig. 2) [21].
While SOCS-1 has been shown to directly bind with high
a⁄nity, and thus potently inhibit, JAK, the a⁄nity of SOCS-3

Fig. 2. Modulation by SOCS of the signalling potential of IRS.
SOCS has been shown to modulate IRS signalling potential via at
least its three canonical mechanisms of inhibition, as shown. In the
context of signalling via the IR/IGF1R, SOCS introduces competition for receptor binding sites, inhibits JAK activity and induces
proteosomal degradation of IRS.

for JAK is relatively low and inhibition occurs only after
binding JAK-proximal sites on the receptor. In the case of
insulin signalling, Kawazoe and colleagues have demonstrated
that overexpression of both SOCS-1 and -3 inhibits the insulin-induced activation of JAKs [20]. However, the physiological importance of JAK inhibition in this setting is placed in
question by the likely overall small contribution of JAK-mediated IRS phosphorylation, which is believed to be primarily
mediated by the IR itself.
Of probably more physiological signi¢cance is the demonstration that SOCS proteins introduce competition for crucial
receptor binding sites. In addition to directly binding and
inhibiting the catalytic activity of JAKs, SOCS-3 has been
shown to bind to the Y960 residue of the IR, a common
docking site for other substrates of the IR, including IRS,
SHC and STAT5 [15]. Thus, association between SOCS-3
and IR may inhibit the association between IRS and IR,
hence reducing the phosphorylation of IRS.
There is evidence that the SOCS proteins may also mediate
e¡ects on insulin signalling distal to the IR itself. SOCS proteins have been shown to play a role in proteosomal targeting
of associated proteins by complexing with Elongins B and C
(for review, see [22]). It has recently been demonstrated that
binding of IRS-1 and -2 by SOCS-1 and -3 (but not SOCS-2)
promotes their subsequent ubiquitination and degradation, an
e¡ect mediated by the SOCS box [21].
It is, however, di⁄cult to interpret the biological signi¢cance of many of the studies on SOCS protein action as
they often involve in vitro experiments, and ectopic and
supraphysiological levels of expression. However, studies in
whole animals lend added credence to the story. Thus,
SOCS-3 has been implicated in TNFK-induced insulin resistance, with the demonstration that SOCS-3 is overexpressed in
the adipose tissue of obese mice, is induced by TNFK injection
and is decreased in ob/ob mice lacking TNFK receptors [19].
In addition, SOCS-1 de¢ciency in mice causes hypersensitivity
to insulin action [20], resulting in prolonged IRS-1 phosphorylation upon insulin treatment, further implicating SOCS-1 in
negative regulation of the insulin signalling pathway. This
group interpret SOCS action to be via the suppression of
IRS-1 phosphorylation, as their experiments overexpressing
SOCS-1 and -3 did not lead to reductions in overall IRS

FEBS 27255 12-6-03 Cyaan Magenta Geel Zwart

A.M. Johnston et al./FEBS Letters 546 (2003) 32^36

expression levels. Conversely, enforced adenoviral-driven
SOCS-1 expression in liver of mice leads to disturbances in
glucose homeostasis, with dramatic reductions in hepatic IRS1 and -2 levels, resulting in hyperglycaemia, hyperinsulinaemia
and resistance to insulin injections and presumably due to
proteosomal degradation of IRS [21]. Which of these mechanisms contribute to a negative regulation of the pathway in a
physiological state, to what extent, and which SOCS proteins
play the major role remains to be established and may well
depend, at least in part, on the level of SOCS expression. It is
thus possible that, at low levels of expression, SOCS-3 may
inhibit signalling through IRS by competition mechanisms,
while at higher levels of expression, SOCS-3 may inhibit signalling by direct antagonisation of receptor autophosphorylation, or through induction of IRS degradation.
Until very recently, the majority of the studies of SOCS
proteins in insulin signalling focussed on the action of
SOCS-1 and -3, and little was known about the role of
SOCS-6. It has now been shown that SOCS-6 has binding
a⁄nity toward IRS-2 and IRS-4 [23] and that ectopically expressed SOCS-6 associates with the IR and inhibits signal
transduction in vivo [18]. In addition, SOCS-6 has also been
reported to directly inhibit IR kinase activity in vitro. However, although mice de¢cient in SOCS-6 have decreased in
body weight, they do not exhibit defects in glucose homeostasis. Clearly, further studies are warranted in order to clarify
the signi¢cance of the association of SOCS-6 with IRS proteins.
Thus, although the SOCS proteins are induced by a gamut
of cytokines, and show a degree interfamilial mechanistic
overlap, evidence is accumulating of the potential of speci¢c
SOCS proteins to modulate insulin signalling with exquisite
control.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Our understanding of the regulation of insulin signalling
has improved in recent years with the discovery that regulatory S/T phosphorylation events, induction of SOCS expression and degradative pathways all converge on IRS molecules
and modulate their activities. Moreover, a link between dysregulation of the above events and the pathophysiology of
insulin resistance and diabetes has been established. However,
the picture is still incomplete. Firstly, the IRS S/T residues
phosphorylated by several kinases have not yet been de¢ned
(see Table 1); determination of these sites will in turn allow
mutagenesis studies and eventually assign a precise function to
each S/T residue, be it positive or negative. Given that S/T
phosphorylation pathways can converge on the same residue
(e.g. both the JNK and PI3K/PDK pathways target S307
[24]), further studies on animal models lacking relevant IRS
S/T kinases should help to elucidate the relative contribution
of each pathway towards the phosphorylation of a target
serine or threonine residue. In addition, while we have a relatively complete picture of the S/T phosphorylation events
taking place on IRS-1, much less is known on the regulation
of IRS-2, which is possibly the most important adapter for
insulin’s metabolic action, as mice lacking IRS-2 develop diabetes [25]. Although the exact relative contribution of the
mechanisms leading to IRS modulation (by phosphorylation,
substrate competition and degradation) remains to be established, it is clear that the IRS proteins play a central role in

the transmission of the insulin signal, and that elucidation of
the means by which this signal is modulated will be of great
signi¢cance for our understanding of glucose homeostasis in
normal and pathophysiological states.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by INSERM, Universite¤ de Nice ^ Sophia-Antipolis, la Re¤gion PACA, the European Community (QLGI-CT-1999-00674, EuroDiabetesGene and QLK3-CT2000-01038) and by Aventis Pharma (Frankfurt, Germany, Contract
99206). L.P. was supported by an INSERM ‘Poste Vert’ postdoctoral
fellowship and in part by FRM (Fondation pour la Recherche Me¤dicale), A.M.J. was supported by an INSERM ‘Poste Vert’ postdoctoral fellowship. We are grateful to Brice Emanuelli for critical reading of the manuscript.