REVIEWS
Critical nodes in signalling pathways:
insights into insulin action
Cullen M. Taniguchi*, Brice Emanuelli* and C. Ronald Kahn

Abstract | Physiologically important cell-signalling networks are complex, and contain
several points of regulation, signal divergence and crosstalk with other signalling cascades.
Here, we use the concept of ‘critical nodes’ to define the important junctions in these
pathways and illustrate their unique role using insulin signalling as a model system.

Critical node
A point in a signalling network
that is essential for the
biological function of a ligand–
receptor interaction, but also
allows divergence of the signal
to facilitate crosstalk between
systems and/or to fine-tune the
response to stimuli.

Insulin receptor substrate
protein
(IRS protein). A large protein
scaffold that serves as a
docking platform for other
signalling proteins that contain
Src-homology-2 domains. The
IRS proteins are required for a
complete insulin signal.

Joslin Diabetes Center,
One Joslin Place, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.
*These authors contributed
equally to this work.
Correspondence to C.R.K.
e-mail: c.ronald.kahn@joslin.
harvard.edu
doi:10.1038/nrm1837

Signalling by membrane receptors is essential for
the regulation of several cell functions, but how each
ligand–receptor interaction produces its own specific
pattern of regulated cellular function is a fundamental
question in biology. The identification of specific receptors and second messenger systems, such as cyclic AMP
(cAMP), led to the classical view of signalling as a linear
cascade (FIG.1a). Over time, this linear cascade evolved
to reflect the divergence that is observed at several steps
in a signalling pathway and the crosstalk between signalling pathways (FIG. 1b,c). However, it is now apparent
that even this model might not be sufficient to explain
the complexity of cellular signalling and the integrated
control of cellular functions.
One of the most daunting challenges to understanding
any particular ligand–receptor system is the identification
of components, or nodes, within the network that are essential mediators or modifiers of the ligand’s signal125. Several
groups have taken quantitative approaches that integrate
biochemical and computational data to identify essential
nodes in signalling networks, as well as to describe how
these nodes might interact with other signalling cascades.
We believe that a complementary approach to describing
cell-signalling networks, using data that has been derived
from in vitro and in vivo genetic knockout studies, could
provide a useful framework for integrating the growing
body of knowledge in the field.
Here, we propose that the essential mediators, or
‘critical nodes’, of any signalling network (FIG. 1d) can be
identified by three criteria: first, the node must constitute
a group of related proteins (for example, gene isoforms)
that are essential for the receptor-mediated signal, and in
which two or more of these related proteins might have
unique biological roles within a signalling network and
therefore serve as a source of divergence within the signalling system; second, the node is highly regulated, both
positively and negatively; and third, the node is a junction for potential crosstalk with other signalling systems.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

We illustrate this concept by analysis of the insulinsignalling network, in which several critical nodes have
been defined and shown to have important roles in
normal physiology, and disease states such as diabetes,
obesity and the metabolic syndrome.

Complexity of the insulin-signalling network
Insulin signalling is mediated by a complex, highly
integrated network that controls several processes.
In the presence of insulin, the insulin receptor (IR)
phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate proteins (IRS
proteins) that are linked to the activation of two main
signalling pathways: the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)–AKT/protein kinase B (PKB) pathway, which is
responsible for most of the metabolic actions of insulin,
and the Ras–mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway, which regulates expression of some genes and
cooperates with the PI3K pathway to control cell growth
and differentiation (reviewed in REF. 1) (FIG. 2).
Although a simple scheme of divergent pathways
looks sufficient to explain insulin signalling, the concept
of critical nodes becomes apparent when one looks at
the sheer number of gene and protein isoforms that are
involved in the activation of AKT/PKB and the generation
of metabolic effects. For instance, the IR has two splice
isoforms, which are usually co-expressed in cells that
also express the highly related insulin-growth factor-1
receptor (IGF1R) that can also be activated by insulin.
Both the IR and IGF1R can phosphorylate at least six
known substrate proteins that are capable of interacting
with eight known forms of the PI3K regulatory subunit,
which associate with three forms of the PI3K catalytic
subunit that can generate phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5triphosphate (PIP3), which leads to the activation of the
three known isoforms of AKT/PKB. Therefore, when
you consider the combinatorial possibilities in these
first steps of the pathway, there are over 1,000 possible combinations, and this number increases further
VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 85

REVIEWS
a Linear

b Divergent

c Network

Ligand

Ligand

Ligand

Receptor

Receptor

Receptor

Effector (E)

E1

Action

E2

Action A Action B

Action C

Action

E1

E2

A

B

E3
C

D

E

d Network with critical nodes
Ligand I

Ligand II

Receptor I

Receptor II

Ligand III

Receptor IIIa
Receptor IIIb
Node5

E4a

E3a
E1

E3b
E3d
Node2

E2b
Node1

B

C

E6

E4c
Node3

E3c

E2a

Action A

E4b

D

E8a
E8b
Node4

E10

E12

E13

E5

E7

E9

E11

E

F

G

H

I

J

Figure 1 | Evolution of our concepts on signalling pathways. The binding of a ligand
to its receptor triggers the activation of signalling pathways through effector (E)
proteins that transduce signals to several intracellular second-messenger systems,
which eventually lead to biological actions. Owing to the several molecules that are
involved in these processes, our concepts of signalling pathways have evolved from
simple linear cascades (a) to complex networks (b and c), and currently networks with
critical nodes that participate in the crosstalk between the signalling networks (d,
represented by the shaded/coloured boxes). In panel d, network 1 is represented by the
green arrows, network 2 by the red arrows, and network 3 by the black arrows. Plain
arrows represent an activation process, dashed arrows represent an activation process
with less intensity and blocked arrows represent an inhibition process. The numbers
beside every component of the network (I, II, III for receptors and 1 to 13 for effectors)
represent distinct proteins, whereas the small letters indicate different isoforms of the
same protein.

Receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK). A cell-surface receptor
with an intracellular tyrosine
kinase domain. The ligandmediated activation of an RTK
results in the activation of the
intracellular kinase domain.

Insulin resistance
Insulin resistance is a condition
in which normal concentrations
of insulin produce a subnormal
biological response. It is
common in many physiological
and pathological states,
including obesity, type-2
diabetes, metabolic syndrome,
polycystic ovarian disease,
pregnancy and puberty.

if we consider the compartmentalization, kinetics and
downstream components of the signalling network.
Among the hundreds of molecules that have been
shown to be involved in the insulin-signalling pathway,
we have identified the IR/IRS, the PI3K heterodimer and
AKT/PKB (FIG. 2) as the three best-defined critical nodes.
As we will explain, each of these network components
constitutes a critical node because they satisfy the criteria discussed above — each is essential for insulin action,
consists of several isoforms with unique functions, is
highly regulated and also mediates crosstalk with other
signalling cascades. Most importantly, these critical
nodes have been tested extensively as essential mediators of insulin signalling, both in vitro and in vivo. Other
critical nodes in the insulin-signalling network might
exist, however, only the IR/IRS, PI3K and AKT/PKB
nodes have the strength and preponderance of data at
this time to be considered ‘critical’. Finally, we will speculate on the existence of other possible critical nodes, and
discuss approaches to investigate these further.

86 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

The IR and the associated IRS node
The first critical node in the insulin-signalling network
is, by definition, the IR and the associated IRS proteins
(FIG. 2). It is important to note that unlike other receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) that bind directly to the cytoplasmic tails of downstream effectors2, the IR and IGF1R satellite proteins that are known as the IRS proteins mediate
the binding of intracellular effectors. In addition, the IR
and the IRS proteins share common mechanisms of
regulation: they are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, and they are negatively regulated by protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), serine phosphorylation and
ligand-induced downregulation.
The activity of the IR is tightly regulated, as unchecked
activation or inactivity would lead to profound metabolic consequences. There are two splice isoforms of
the IR, and each has a different affinity for insulin and
IGF1 (see text, BOX 1). In addition, there are several
mechanisms of negative regulation. One class of regulatory proteins is tyrosine phosphatases, the most studied
of which is PTP1B. PTP1B interacts directly with the
IR and dephosphorylates important tyrosine residues,
thereby reducing its activity. Knockouts of PTP1B have
shown remarkable efficacy in improving insulin sensitivity in vivo through enhanced insulin signalling3. Other
proteins, such as suppressor of cytokine signalling-1
(SOCS1) and SOCS3 (REF. 4), growth-factor-receptorbound protein 10 (Grb10) and plasma-cell-membrane
glycoprotein-1 (PC1) downregulate IR function by sterically blocking its interaction with the IRS proteins, or
by modifying its kinase activity. The SOCS proteins are
of particular importance because they have been shown
to be upregulated in states of insulin resistance, such as
obesity, and therefore might contribute to the pathophysiology of diabetes5. The IR is also downregulated
at the protein level by ligand-stimulated internalization
and degradation, which is a common feature of most
insulin-resistant, hyperinsulinaemic states, including
obesity and type-2 diabetes6.
Insulin-receptor substrates. At least 11 intracellular substrates of the IR and IGF1R kinases have been identified.
Six of these belong to the family of IRS proteins, and have
been termed IRS1–6 (REFS 7–11). Other substrates of the
IR/IGF1R include Grb2-associated binder-1 (Gab1)12,
Cas-Br-M (murine) ecotropic retroviral transforming
sequence homologue (Cbl)13 and the various isoforms
of Src-homology-2-containing protein (Shc)14. IRS1
and IRS2 are widely distributed, whereas IRS3 is largely
limited to the adipocytes and brain, and IRS4 is expressed
primarily in embryonic tissues or cell lines. IRS5
and IRS6 seem to have limited tissue expression, and
function in signalling11.
The IRS proteins have both pleckstrin-homology domains
(PH domains) and phosphotyrosine-binding domains (PTB
domains) near the N terminus that account for the high
affinity of these substrates for the IR (FIG. 3). The centre
and C terminus of the IRS proteins contain up to 20
potential tyrosine-phosphorylation sites that, after phosphorylation by the IR, bind to intracellular molecules that
contain Src-homology-2 domains (SH2 domains).

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

REVIEWS
TNFα

IGF1

TNFR

IGF1R

Insulin

Cytokines (IL-6, leptin, etc.)

Plasma membrane
IR A/B
PTP1B

CAP
Cbl

IRS1

Shc

JNK
CDC42

IRS3
p85α

TC10
PTEN

p110α
p110β

PDK1, 2

p55α
PI3K

IRS4
Node1

STAT

Ras

SOCS1, 3

p50α

p110γ

p85β

aPKC
AS160

JAK

IRS2

Rac

Glucose
uptake

Rec

p55γ
Node2

AKT1

ERK1

AKT2
Cell growth,
differentiation

AKT3
Node3

p90RSK

mTOR

GSK3

ERK2

FOXO1
Protein synthesis

Glucose
synthesis
Gluconeogenesis

Pleckstrin-homology
domain
(PH domain). A protein domain
of ~100 amino acids with
homology to pleckstrin that
mediates the binding to
membrane phospholipids, such
as PIP3.

Phosphotyrosine-binding
domain
(PTB domain). A domain that
mediates the binding to
specific phosphotyrosine
residues. The affinity of a PTB
domain for a phosphotyrosine
depends on the residues that
surround the phosphotyrosine.
For instance, the PTB domain
of the IRS proteins binds to an
NPXpY motif.

Src-homology-2 domain
(SH2 domain). A domain of
~100 amino acids that binds
to phosphotyrosine residues in
proteins. Every protein’s SH2
domain might have a slightly
different phosphotyrosinebinding motif.

Figure 2 | Critical nodes in the insulin-signalling network. Critical nodes form an important part of the signalling
network that functions downstream of the insulin receptor (IR) (black arrows) and the insulin growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF1R) (blue arrows). Signalling pathways that are activated by cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and leptin interfere with insulin signalling through crosstalk (orange and red arrows). Three important
nodes in the insulin pathway are the IR, the IR substrates (IRS) 1–4 (light blue box), the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)
with its several regulatory and catalytic subunits (light green box), and the three AKT/protein kinase B (PKB) isoforms (pink
box). Downstream or intermediate effectors, as well as modulators, of these critical nodes include atypical protein kinase
C (aPKC), Akt substrate of 160 kDa (AS160), Cas-Br-M (murine) ecotropic retroviral transforming sequence homologue
(Cbl), Cbl-associated protein (CAP), cell-division cycle 42 (CDC42), extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1 and
ERK2), forkhead box O1 (FOXO1), glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), Janus kinase (JAK), c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK),
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p90RSK), phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1
and 2 (PDK1 and 2), phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN), protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B), Ras, Rac, Srchomology-2-containing protein (Shc), suppressor of cytokine signalling (SOCS), signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT), and Ras homologue gene family, member Q (ARHQ; also called TC10). Dashed arrows represent an
activation process with less intensity.

The best-studied SH2 proteins that bind to phosphorylated IRS proteins are adaptor molecules, such
as the regulatory subunit of PI3K, or the adaptor molecule Grb2, which associates with son-of-sevenless
(SOS) to activate the Ras–MAPK pathway (reviewed
in REF. 15). The other category of proteins that bind
to IRS proteins are enzymes, such as SH2-domaincontaining tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2) 16, and
cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases, such as Fyn. There are
also a few proteins that bind to IRS proteins that do
not contain known SH2 domains, such as the calcium
ATPases SERCA1 and 2 (REF. 17), and the SV40 large
T antigen18. Like the IR, the ability of the IRS proteins
to mediate intracellular signalling is also regulated
by the action of tyrosine phosphatases. Interestingly,
SHP2, which binds to IRS1 on two phosphotyrosine
residues at its C terminus 16, dephosphorylates the
other phosphotyrosines that mediate the binding of
PI3K and Grb2.

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

Serine phosphorylation of IRS proteins. IRS proteins also
undergo serine phosphorylation in response to insulin and
other stimuli, including cytokines and free fatty acids19.
There are over 70 potential serine-phosphorylation sites
in IRS1, and in general, serine phosphorylation seems to
negatively regulate IRS signalling. Serine phosphorylation of IRS1 is increased in insulin-resistant states, and
might have a role in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance.
Many IRS kinases, such as extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)20, S6 kinase21, and c-Jun-N-terminal kinase
(JNK)22, are activated by insulin, which indicates that serine phosphorylation of the IRS proteins might represent
a negative-feedback mechanism for the insulin-signalling
pathway. Serine phosphorylation of the IRS proteins might
also be a mechanism that mediates crosstalk between
signalling systems. Recently, the activation of nuclear
factor (NF)-κB-mediated pathways also have been shown
to inhibit insulin signalling through enhanced serine
phosphorylation of IRS1 (REF. 23).

VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 87

REVIEWS
Box 1 | The structure of the insulin receptor
The insulin receptor (IR) is a tetrameric protein that consists of two extracellular
α-subunits and two intracellular β-subunits. It belongs to a subfamily of receptor
tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which also includes the insulin growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R)
and an orphan receptor, known as the IR-related receptor (IRR)120. Each of these
receptors is the product of a separate gene, in which the two subunits are derived from
a single-chain precursor or proreceptor that is processed by a furin-like enzyme to give
a single α−β-subunit complex. Two of the α−β dimers are linked with disulfide bonds to
form the tetramer, thereby allowing for the creation of a hybrid IR–IGF1R complex,
which serves as an additional receptor isoform.
Functionally, the IR behaves like a classical allosteric enzyme in which the α-subunit
inhibits the tyrosine-kinase activity that is intrinsic to the β-subunit. Insulin binding to
the α-subunit, or removal of the α-subunit by proteolysis or genetic deletion, leads to a
derepression — for example, activation of the kinase activity in the β-subunit121.
Following this initial activation, there is transphosphorylation of the β-subunits, which
leads to a conformational change and further increase in kinase activity.
In addition, the α-subunit undergoes differential mRNA splicing into two isoforms
that either lack (IRA) or contain (IRB) exon 11, which encodes 12 amino acids near the
C terminus of the α-subunit122. The IRA and IRB isoforms have differential expression
patterns, and the IRB isoform has a higher affinity for IGFII binding123. Moreover, in
pancreatic β-cells, IRA and IRB have been linked to different downstream events that are
associated with transcription of insulin and cell survival124.

The exact mechanisms by which serine phosphorylation alters IRS1 function are not clear. One possible
mechanism is that the phosphorylated serine interferes
with the functional domains of IRS1 in which they reside
(FIG. 3). For instance, the phosphorylation of Ser307 of
IRS1, which is located in the PTB domain, has been correlated with negative regulation of insulin signalling24.
In vitro phosphorylation of this residue is sufficient to
disrupt the interaction between the IR and IRS1 in a
yeast-tri-hybrid assay25. Phosphorylation of Ser270, also
within the PTB domain, has been shown to promote the
interaction of IRS1 with 14-3-3 proteins, which might
interfere with the function of the PTB domain26. In addition, a recent in vivo study has shown that decreased
phosphorylation at Ser612 by MAPK correlates with
increased phosphorylation of Tyr608 (REF. 27).
Although serine phosphorylation of IRS1 strongly
correlates with insulin resistance, its exact role in the
pathophysiology of insulin resistance is still not completely understood. Moreover, it is still unknown whether
the serine phosphorylation of other IRS proteins might
also have an important regulatory role.

Transphosphorylation
The transfer of a phosphate by
a protein kinase to a residue
within the same kinase
molecule, or to a different
kinase molecule of the same
kind.

Regulation of IRS expression. The IRS proteins
might also be regulated by decreased levels of protein
expression. Hyperinsulinaemia is known to decrease
the expression of IRS1 and IRS2 in both cell-culture
models and in the tissues of mice 28. Two possible
mechanisms could explain this effect. First, hyperinsulinaemia induces degradation of IRS1 protein and
inhibits the synthesis of IRS2 at the transcriptional
level28. Second, some studies have shown that SOCS
proteins might induce ubiquitin-mediated degradation
of IRS1 and IRS2 (REF. 29). Regardless of the mechanism, decreased levels of IRS proteins, coupled with
decreased levels of the IR itself, certainly contribute to
the insulin resistance in diabetic states in both rodents
and humans30.

88 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

Insights from knockout studies. Although the IRS proteins are highly homologous and possess many similar
tyrosine-phosphorylation motifs, studies in knockout
mice and knockout cell lines indicate that the various
IRS proteins serve complementary, rather than redundant, roles in insulin/IGF1 signalling (reviewed in
REF. 31) (FIG. 4). Irs1-knockout mice have defective insulin
action primarily in the muscle, and a generalized defect
in body growth due to IGF1 resistance32. Irs2-knockout
mice have greater defects in insulin signalling in the
liver, and show altered growth in only a few tissues, such
as certain neurons33 and pancreatic β-cells34. Likewise
at the cellular level, Irs1-knockout pre-adipocytes have
defects in differentiation35, whereas Irs2-knockout preadipocytes differentiate normally, but fail to respond to
insulin-stimulated glucose transport36. These knockout
studies clearly indicate that the IRS proteins constitute a
critical node, such that the deletion of each isoform has
a different biological consequence.
The mechanisms that account for differences
between IRS isoforms, particularly IRS1 and IRS2, have
recently been explored both in vitro and in vivo. When
small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are used to reduce
the expression of IRS1 or IRS2 specifically in L6 myotubes, IRS1 is found to more closely regulate glucose
uptake, whereas IRS2 seems to be more closely linked
to MAPK activation37. Tissue-specific knockdown of
hepatic IRS1 and IRS2 using adenoviral short hairpin
RNAs in vivo has demonstrated that IRS1 and IRS2 have
complementary roles in the maintenance of AKT/PKB
activation, but exert differential roles in the regulation
of gene expression38. Therefore, decreased hepatic IRS1
correlates with the increased expression of genes that
are involved in gluconeogenesis, whereas downregulation of hepatic IRS2 results in enhanced expression of
genes that are involved in lipogenesis.
Biochemical studies have revealed several molecular
mechanisms by which the IRS proteins could exert their
specific effects. For instance, IRS1 and IRS2 have been
shown to differ in their ability to bind to various SH2
partners. IRS1 can bind to the Abl tyrosine kinase and
SHP2, whereas IRS2 does not39. In addition, IRS1 was
shown to bind to several SH2 proteins with greater affinity than IRS2, including Grb2, the Crk adaptor protein
and phospholipase Cγ 39. IRS1 and IRS2 have also been
shown to have a differential ability to activate various
members of the atypical protein kinase C (aPKC) family40. IRS3 and IRS4 probably modify the actions of IRS1
and IRS2, as they cannot activate MAPK and PI3K to
the same degree as IRS1 and IRS2, and might actually
antagonize some of their functions when expressed at
high levels41. The IRS-protein isoforms also differ in their
cellular compartmentalization42 and activation kinetics43.
In addition, IRS2 is structurally different from the other
IRS proteins — it can bind to the IR through a unique
kinase-regulatory-loop binding domain, which might
contribute to its specific effects44.

The PI3K node
The PI3K enzyme consists of a regulatory and a catalytic
subunit, each of which occurs in several isoforms (FIG. 5).

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

REVIEWS
PI3K

Binding partners
IRS1

13

PH

460
Y
117 144

PTB

546
Y

608
Y

Grb2

628
Y

PI3K
891
Y

SHP2

935
Y

1179 1222
Y
Y

316

1243

S S S S S
265 267 302 307 332

GSK3β AKT/PKB

AKT/PKB IKK JNK PKCθ p70S6K

AMPK
S
1101
SIK2

S S
S S S
612 632 661 731 789

ERK

PI3K

ROK

PKCθ

mTOR

Grb2

SHP2

IRS kinases
Y
IRS2

PH

PI3K
Y

Y

Y

PTB

482

Y
PH

Y

SHP2

PI3K

IRS4

Y

1322

Y
PH

Y

PTB

Grb2

IRS3

Y

PTB

Grb2
Y

Y

SHP2
Y
1257

Figure 3 | Structure and interacting partners of the insulin-receptor substrates. The four insulin-receptor substrate
(IRS) isoforms, IRS1, IRS2, IRS3 and IRS4, share a pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain (magenta), a phosphotyrosine-binding
(PTB) domain (dark green) and several sites of phosphorylation on tyrosine and serine residues. The positions of the
tyrosine residues (Y) that are phosphorylated by the IR and the downstream-signalling proteins that bind to these sites are
shown. The positions of the serine residues (S) and the kinases responsible for their phosphorylation are also shown. Blue
circles represent sites of positive regulation, whereas red circles represent sites of negative regulation. A combination of
both colours shows sites in which the regulation has been reported to be either positive or negative under various
conditions. White circles represent sites in which the effect of phosphorylation is currently unknown. Several proteins
bind to or phosphorylate IRS, including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), growth-factor-receptor-bound protein-2
(Grb2), Src-homology-2 (SH2) domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2), AKT/protein kinase B (PKB), IκB kinase
(IKK), c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK), protein kinase Cθ (PKCθ), p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K), glycogen
synthase kinase-3 β (GSK3β), extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Rho kinase (ROK), mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), salt-inducible serine/threonine kinase 2 (SIK2).

Phosphotyrosine motif
A phosphorylated tyrosine
residue that is flanked by a few
different amino-acid residues.
Different phosphotyrosinebinding proteins have varying
affinities for different
phosphotyrosine motifs, which
explains, in part, the specificity
of phosphotyrosine-binding
proteins.

AGC kinases
A large family of serine/
threonine kinases that includes
members as diverse as the
cAMP-dependent protein
kinases, and protein kinase C.
The members of this AGC
subgroup include AKT/PKB,
serum/glucocorticoid kinases
and the atypical PKCs.

The activation of the catalytic subunit depends on the
interaction of the two SH2 domains in the regulatory
subunit, with specific phosphotyrosine motifs in the IRS
proteins of the sequence (pY)MXM and (pY)XXM45.
Inhibitors of PI3K or transfection with dominantnegative constructs block almost all of insulin’s metabolic actions, including stimulation of glucose transport,
glycogen synthesis, lipid synthesis and adipocyte differentiation46, which highlights the pivotal role of this
enzyme in the metabolic actions of insulin (FIG. 4).
PI3K regulates insulin signalling by generating PIP3.
PI3K activates critical regulators of insulin signalling by
catalysing the formation of the lipid second messenger
PIP3 in the cell (FIG. 5). Proteins with PH domains can
bind to PIP3 and become localized to the same region,
which allows for their activation. The AGC superfamily
of serine/threonine protein kinases, guanine-nucleotideexchange proteins of the Rho family and the TEC family

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

of tyrosine kinases are among these proteins. Perhaps
the most critical of the AGC kinases for insulin action
is the 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1
(PDK1), which is responsible for the activation of AKT/
PKB and aPKCs. PDK1 phosphorylates the activation
loops of AKT/PKB on Thr308 (REF. 47) and PKCζ on
Thr410 (REF. 48), enhancing the activity of these kinases.
AKT/PKB, however, requires a second phosphorylation
on Ser473 for full activation. Because PDK1 is unable to
phosphorylate Ser473, the existence of a PDK2 has been
postulated. Recently, new evidence has revealed that the
PDK2 for AKT/PKB might be the rapamycin-insensitive
companion of mTOR (rictor)–mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) complex. This complex is necessary
for Ser473 phosphorylation in Drosophila melanogaster
and mammalian cells, including adipocytes49.
The positive actions of PI3K can be negatively
regulated at the level of PIP3 by phospholipid phosphatases, such as phosphatase and tensin homologue

VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 89

REVIEWS

Glucose uptake
(muscle/fat)

Lipogenesis
(liver)
Gluconeogenesis
(liver)

Adipogenesis
IRS4
IRS1

Appetite
(hypothalamus)

Islet growth/survival
(β-cell/pancreas)
IRS2

PI3K
IRS3

Grb2/MAPK
SHP2

Figure 4 | Isoform-specific functions of IRS proteins. This figure summarizes the
relative contribution of each insulin-receptor substrate (IRS) isoform (purple boxes) to
the biological actions that are regulated by insulin (black arrows), as determined by
knockdown and knockout studies. The main signalling pathways that are activated by
each of these isoforms are also shown. These pathways involve Src-homology-2 (SH2)domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP2), growth-factor-receptor-bound
protein-2/mitogen-activated protein kinase (Grb2/MAPK) and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K). The thickness of the arrows is proportional to the intensity of the signal
that is mediated by the IRS proteins.

(PTEN) and SH2-containing inositol 5′-phosphatase-2
(SHIP2), which dephosphorylate and inactivate PIP3.
PTEN dephosphorylates phosphoinositides on the
3′-position50, whereas SHIP2 functions on the 5′-position.
In vivo deletions of PTEN improve insulin sensitivity51,
whereas the role of SHIP2 is controversial52. However,
a recent knockout of SHIP2 protects mice against
obesity-induced insulin resistance53.
Several non-redundant isoforms of the PI3K subunits.
PI3K exists as a heterodimer that consists of a catalytic
subunit of 110 kDa and an SH2-containing regulatory
subunit of ~85 kDa. The three different catalytic subunits, p110α, β and δ are derived from three different
genes and show different tissue distribution, with the
α and β forms being almost ubiquitous (reviewed in
REF. 54), and p110δ being restricted to leukocytes. The
catalytic subunit of PI3K is almost always found bound
to the regulatory subunit, because free p110 is unstable
and quickly degraded55. This binding of p110 to the
regulatory subunits not only stabilizes the catalytic
subunit, but also allosterically inhibits enzymatic function until the heterodimer binds to phosphotyrosines,
which relieves the inhibition55. The p110α and p110β
knockouts are early embryonic lethal, which indicates
that each of these isoforms has a unique biological
function that cannot be compensated for by the expression of the others. Overexpression studies have indicated that p110α might have a more important role in
platelet-derived growth-factor signalling, whereas p110β
is more important in mediating insulin-stimulated
glucose uptake56.

90 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

The catalytic subunit of PI3K also regulates its own
function through its intrinsic serine-kinase activity that
phosphorylates the regulatory subunit p85α on Ser608
(REF. 57). This phosphorylation is known to decrease the
enzymatic activity of the heterodimer. In addition, PI3K
can serine-phosphorylate IRS1 and decrease its signalling
in cell-culture models58.
At least eight isoforms of the regulatory subunit
of PI3K have been identified, which are derived from
three distinct genes59. Pik3r1 encodes 65–75% of the
regulatory subunits, mostly in the form of p85α, and
is also responsible for producing the splice isoforms
p55α and p50α. Each of the Pik3r1 gene products
can also be expressed with or without a spliced 24nucleotide insert59. p85α is expressed ubiquitously,
whereas p55α and p50α are expressed primarily in
skeletal muscle and liver, respectively. Pik3r2 produces
p85β and accounts for roughly 20% of the regulatory
subunits in the cell60. Pik3r3 encodes p55PIK, which
is similar in structure to p55α, but is expressed at low
levels in most tissues.
In addition to its role as a positive regulator of PI3K
function, the regulatory subunit is also recognized as an
important negative regulator of PI3K and insulin action.
This notion stems from the paradoxical observation that
knockouts of the regulatory subunit can improve insulin
sensitivity60–63, and can rescue the diabetic phenotype of
mice with genetic reductions of IR and IRS1 (REF. 64).
This inverse correlation between p85 levels and insulin sensitivity is also applicable when the regulatory
subunits are expressed at greater-than-normal levels. For
instance, p85 overexpression is correlated with skeletalmuscle insulin resistance in mouse models of gestational
diabetes65, and has been linked to insulin resistance in
obese humans66.
Negative regulation of insulin signalling by PI3K. The
negative regulation of insulin signalling by the PI3K
regulatory subunits is thought to occur through several
mechanisms (FIG. 5). One factor is the stoichiometry of
the regulatory subunit to the catalytic heterodimer64.
Under normal conditions, the concentration of regulatory subunits is in excess of the catalytic subunits
and phosphorylated IRS proteins. This catalytically
inactive monomeric p85 competes with the p85–p110
heterodimer for binding to the phosphotyrosines on the
IRS proteins. Therefore, a reduction of the regulatory
subunit can improve insulin action because it preferentially reduces the p85α monomer, and allows the
heterodimer to bind to phosphorylated IRS proteins.
This mechanism, however, does not fully explain the
negative effects of the regulatory subunit, because the
overexpression of the short isoforms p55α or p50α do
not achieve similar decreases in insulin action despite
similar alterations in stoichiometry67.
At least two other mechanisms that involve only fulllength p85 might also help to explain the negative effects
of the regulatory subunits. The first involves the sequestration and/or compartmentalization of PI3K activity.
For example, it has been shown that free, monomeric
p85α, and not other regulatory subunit isoforms, can

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

REVIEWS
3 Other negative
effects

Insulin
Plasma membrane

P
P
P
P
P

Insulin receptor
1 Competition with
heterodimer

p110β p85α P

PIP2

AKT/PKB

P p85α p110α

p55α P

P p55α

?
p85α P
p110α p85α

PIP3

IRS1

P p85α

p85α P

P p50α

p85β P

P p85α p110β

p50α P

P

PTEN
Downstream
effects

?
JNK

P p85α

P

2 Sequestration/
compartmentalization
of IRS/PI3K activity

P p85α

p110 p85α P
IRS1
p85α P

P

p110 p85α P

P

Figure 5 | PI3K as a critical node. The combinations of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) derive from
dimerization of the different PI3K regulatory and catalytic subunits. The binding of the heterodimers to
phosphotyrosines (P) on insulin-receptor substrate (IRS) proteins leads to the production of phosphatidylinositol3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3) from PIP2 at the plasma membrane. This phospholipid triggers activation of further
downstream-signalling cascades that are mediated by AKT/protein kinase B (PKB). The higher abundance of the
regulatory subunits compared to heterodimers allows for competition for the binding to the IRS (1), and diminishes
efficient signalling. Other mechanisms of regulation involve the sequestration of the IRS/PI3K complex in a
signalling-silent compartment (2) and the recruitment of inhibitory proteins that might interact with the p85
regulatory subunits. This could then lead to the degradation of PIP3 by phospholipid phosphatases, such as the
phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN), as well as negative regulation through c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) (3).

Src-homology-3 domain
(SH3 domain). A protein
sequence of ~50 amino acids
that facilitates the binding to
proline-rich regions of proteins.
Binding of an SH3 domain to a
proline-rich region can occur in
an intramolecular or
intermolecular fashion.

Breakpoint-cluster region
homology domain
A ~150-residue region of
p85α with homology to the
breakpoint-cluster region gene
and homology to Rho-GTPase
activating proteins, which
decrease the activity of small
GTPases. Despite this
homology, the breakpointcluster region homology
domain has not been
demonstrated to have
GTPase activity.

sequester IRS1, and any associated PI3K enzymatic
activity, into inert cellular foci that are incapable of
generating PIP3 (REF. 68).
The second mechanism involves crosstalk between
the p85 subunit and the stress-kinase pathway. Recent
studies have shown that the p85 subunit is required for
the insulin-stimulated activation of JNK. Reconstitution
studies indicate that the regulation of JNK activity is
mediated through p85α, and not the shorter Pik3r1
isoforms. JNK activity is also restored by a dominant
negative p85 that cannot bind to p110, which indicates
that monomeric p85 activates JNK independent of its
role as a component of the PI3K holoenzyme69. We have
recently generated a conditional knockout of Pik3r1 in
liver, and found that this relationship between p85α
and JNK also occurs in vivo, and might have an important role in the regulation of whole-body insulin sensitivity (C.M.T., J. Luo, L. Cantley, C.R.K., unpublished
observation).
The negative regulation that occurs almost exclusively by the p85 regulatory subunit indicates that

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

the functional differences might stem from structural
differences between the isoforms (FIG. 5). All the regulatory subunit isoforms share a common C terminus with
two SH2 domains and an inter-SH2 domain, which
has the p110 binding domain (reviewed in REF. 70).
The structure of the subunits, however, diverges in the
length and composition of their N termini. The N termini of p85α and p85β are ~339 amino acids long and
contain an SH3 domain, two proline-rich domains and a
breakpoint cluster-region homology domain. p55α and p50α
have N-terminal sequences that consist of only 34 amino
acids and 6 amino acids, respectively59.
The unique N terminus of p85α has been found to
bind to several interesting molecules that might regulate insulin sensitivity, including c-Cbl71 and the small
GTPases Rac1 and cell-division cycle 42 (CDC42)72.
Although the in vivo effect of these interactions on insulin
sensitivity has yet to be determined, the preponderance
of evidence indicates that p85α probably has many ways
of regulating insulin sensitivity, besides its conventional
role in regulating the catalytic subunit of PI3K.

VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 91

REVIEWS
Plasma membrane

SHIP2

P

P

AKT1

mTOR

PH
P

Cat

P

AKT2

Cat

P

Cat

P

PTEN

TRB3
Active

Cat

PI3K

PH

PDK1

PIP3

PH

IR

PHLPP

PH

PP2A

AKT3

Inactive

Rictor
Translocation
P
P

PH

GLUT4

P

TSC1/2

Cat
TSC1/2
14-3-3
P

P

Rab GTPases

GSK3

GSK3

Active

Inactive

FOXO1

FOXO1

Rheb

Raptor

mTOR
Nucleus

P

AS160

FOXO1

AS160

4EBP1

GS

p70S6K

PEPCK
↑ Glucose
uptake

↑ Glycogen
synthesis

↓ Gluconeogenesis

↑ Protein
synthesis

Figure 6 | AKT/PKB as a critical node. The three AKT/protein kinase B (PKB) isoforms (in red) share the same structural
organization: a pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain, which is required for binding to phospholipids, and a catalytic domain
(Cat), which becomes active on phosphorylation (P) of two residues (Tyr308 and Ser473 for AKT1, Tyr309 and Ser474 for
AKT2, and either Tyr305 alone or Tyr305 and Ser472 for AKT3). The upstream regulators of AKT/PKB activity are
represented in green. Positive regulators are phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), which produces phosphatidylinositol3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3) in response to insulin. PIP3 recruits phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) and AKT/PKB at
the plasma membrane, where AKT/PKB is phosphorylated by PDK1 and PDK2 (this is thought to be a complex between the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and the rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR (rictor)). Negative regulators
include the phosphatases phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN), Src-homology-2 domain-containing inositol
phosphatase-2 (SHIP2), phosphatase-2A (PP2A) and the PH-domain leucine-rich-repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP).
Tribbles-3 (TRB3) is another protein that can bind to and inhibit AKT/PKB. The downstream targets of AKT/PKB are shown
in purple. The GTPase activating protein AKT substrate of 160 kDa (AS160) is one of the AKT/PKB targets that is
responsible for the translocation of the glucose transporter-4 (GLUT4). Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), forkhead box
O1 (FOXO1) and the tuberous sclerosis complex-1 and -2 (TSC1/2) complex are direct targets of AKT/PKB. GSK3 inhibits
glycogen synthase (GS). Phosphorylated FOXO1 is sequestered in the cytoplasm on binding to 14-3-3 proteins. TSC1/2
inhibits the small GTPase Ras homologue enriched in brain (Rheb), an activator of mTOR. mTOR, associated with
regulatory associated protein of mTOR (raptor), phosphorylates its substrates eukaryotic translation initiation factor
4E-binding protein 1 (4EBP1) and p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K). Plain arrows represent an activation process,
and blocked arrows represent an inhibition process. IR, insulin receptor; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.

AKT/PKB as a critical node
AKT/PKB is a serine/threonine kinase that is a downstream target of PI3K signalling. AKT/PKB mediates
most of the PI3K-mediated metabolic actions of insulin through the phosphorylation of several substrates,
including other kinases, signalling proteins and
transcription factors (FIG. 6).
AKT/PKB targets. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3)
was the first physiological target of AKT/PKB to be identified73. Phosphorylation of GSK3 decreases its activity
towards glycogen synthase, which leads to increased
glycogen synthesis74. GSK3 can also phosphorylate

92 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

several other substrates and is involved in many processes
besides the regulation of glycogen synthesis74.
AKT/PKB seems to regulate glucose uptake by phosphorylating and inhibiting the Rab-GTPase-activating
protein, AS160 (for AKT substrate of 160 kDa)75. This triggers the activation of Rab small GTPases that are involved
in the cytoskeletal re-organization that is required for
the translocation of the glucose transporter GLUT4 to
the plasma membrane. AKT/PKB also phosphorylates
and inhibits tuberin (also known as tuberous sclerosis
complex-2, TSC2), which is in complex with hamartin
(TSC1)76. Because this complex inhibits the growth regulator mTOR, the negative regulation of TSC1/2 by AKT/

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

REVIEWS

Diacylglycerol
(DAG). DAG is a lipid second
messenger that is produced by
the cleavage of PIP2 by
phospholipase C. DAG is
involved in the activation of
conventional and novel protein
kinase Cs (PKCs).

GLUT4 translocation
Relocalization and fusion of an
intracellular vesicle that
contains the glucose
transporter GLUT4 to the
plasma membrane. It allows
the uptake of extracellular
glucose that is stimulated by
insulin in muscle and adipose
tissues.

PKB effectively activates the mTOR pathway. mTOR
associates with raptor and other proteins, and regulates
protein synthesis by phosphorylating the proteins p70
ribosomal protein S6 kinase and eukaryotic translation
initiation factor 4E binding protein-1 (REF. 76).
AKT/PKB also regulates the expression of gluconeogenic and lipogenic enzymes by controlling the activity
of the winged helix or forkhead (FOX) class of transcription factors. The FOX family contains over 100 members,
and several of these are crucial for insulin action77. For
instance, FOXO1 activates gluconeogenic genes in liver78
and inhibits adipogenesis79, and insulin reverses these
effects through AKT/PKB, which phosphorylates FOXO1
on Ser256. This event leads to interactions with 14-3-3
proteins and sequestration in the cytoplasm77. The same
principle applies to FOXA2, which is a crucial regulator
of fasting lipid metabolism. AKT/PKB-mediated phosphorylation of Thr156 of FOXA2 prevents its nuclear
localization and transcriptional activity80.

with AKT2 particularly enriched in insulin-sensitive tissues, such as liver and fat90. Studies done in adipocytes
derived from Akt2 knockout animals have shown that
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake is severely reduced
and cannot be compensated for by overexpression of
AKT1 (REF. 91). An siRNA-based approach in 3T3-L1
adipocytes has also highlighted the primary role of AKT2
on insulin responsiveness in adipocytes92. Interestingly,
AKT2 has been found to be co-localized with GLUT4containing vesicles, a property not shared by AKT1
and AKT3 (REF. 93). Furthermore, Synip, a protein that
regulates the docking and fusion of GLUT4-containing
vesicles, is phosphorylated by AKT2, but not by AKT1
or AKT3 (REF. 94). Because the main structural differences between AKT isoforms occur at the PH domains95,
it is tempting to speculate that other AKT targets will
also show isoform specificity based on the differential
binding of their PH domains to various phospholipids
or other binding partners.

Complex regulation of AKT/PKB. AKT/PKB activity
is regulated by several inhibitory molecules, including
enzymes like the protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A) and
the PH-domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase
(PHLPP), which directly dephosphorylate and deactivate AKT/PKB81,82. Other regulators, such as tribbles-3
(TRB3), bind to unphosphorylated AKT/PKB and
inhibit its phosphorylation and activation in vivo83.
TRB3 levels are upregulated in fasting mice, and overexpression of TRB3 increases hepatic glucose output.
Conversely, RNAi-mediated downregulation of TRB3
improves insulin sensitivity84.

Other possible signalling nodes
The IR/IRS, PI3K and AKT/PKB signalling nodes are
‘critical nodes’ because they fulfil the criteria for being
a critical node (as discussed above), including a significant amount of in vitro and in vivo evidence. Below we
present some other molecules that have been implicated
in insulin action. Although they have some of the characteristics of critical nodes, more experiments are required
to define their true role in the signalling network, and to
determine whether they represent true critical nodes.

Divergent functions of the three AKT/PKB isoforms.
AKT/PKB has three isoforms in mammals, each
encoded by a different gene (AKT1–3, also known
as PKB α, β and γ; FIG. 6). These isoforms share the
same general structure that consists of an N-terminal
PH domain and a C-terminal catalytic domain, both
with high degrees of amino-acid identity. Nevertheless,
recent data that were obtained using knockout mice
and siRNA indicate that the isoforms are involved
in the regulation of different biological processes.
Deletion of AKT1 results in growth retardation and
reduced lifespan85, but no metabolic abnormalities86.
By contrast, AKT2-deficient mice display insulin
resistance and develop diabetes due, at least in part,
to the inability of insulin to induce glucose utilization
and decrease hepatic glucose output87. Consistent with
these studies, a mutation in the kinase domain of AKT2
has been found to cause severe insulin resistance and
diabetes in humans88. AKT3, on the other hand, does
not seem to have a role in glucose homeostasis, but has
significant effects on neural development89.
The specificity of action of different AKT/PKB
isoforms results from differences in their tissue distribution, subcellular localization and downstreamsignalling targets. The relative ratios of expression of the
three isoforms vary considerably among tissues. AKT3
is predominantly expressed in the nervous system and
testis, whereas AKT1 and AKT2 are widely distributed,

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

aPKCs and glucose transport. Along with AKT/PKB
activation, an important downstream effector of PI3K
in mediating the metabolic effects of insulin is the activation of aPKC. In contrast to conventional or novel
PKCs, aPKCs are not sensitive to the second messengers calcium or diacylglycerol (DAG). As a member of
the AGC superfamily, the mechanisms of the aPKCs are
similar to AKT/PKB, requiring PIP3 and phosphorylation by PDK1 (REF. 96). aPKCs have been shown to have
a role in insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and GLUT4
translocation in adipocytes and muscle 97. Decreased
activation of aPKCs has been reported in the muscle of
type-2 diabetic humans and rodents, whereas AKT/PKB
activation might be unchanged98. The aPKCs have also
been involved in the regulation of lipid synthesis in the
liver by increasing the level of sterol-regulatory-element
binding protein-1c expression98.
The aPKC isoenzymes λ and ζ are encoded by two
different genes, and their levels of expression vary. PKCλ
is the main aPKC in the skeletal muscle and adipose tissue of the mouse, whereas PKCζ is more prominent in
rats, monkeys and humans97. The high level of positive
and negative regulation of these kinases, and the role that
these proteins have in insulin action, indicate that they
might form a critical node in insulin signalling. However,
in vitro reconstitution experiments have indicated that
both isoforms can function interchangeably to support
insulin-stimulated glucose transport97. Tissue-specific
knockouts of the various aPKC isoforms might shed
light on the relative roles of these genes.

VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 93

REVIEWS
The Ras–MAPK pathway. The Ras–MAPK pathway is
activated by insulin following the binding of Grb2 and
the guanyl nucleotide-exchange factor SOS to cognate
phosphotyrosines on IRS proteins Shc and Gab1. This
binding triggers the activation of the small GTPase Ras
and the subsequent activation of Raf, which triggers
a kinase cascade that results in the phosphorylation
and activation of the dual-specificity kinases MEK1
(MAPK and ERK kinase 1) and MEK2, which in turn
phosphorylate MAPK/ERK1 and ERK2 on threonine
and tyrosine residues. The activated ERKs phosphorylate various targets, including p90 ribosomal protein
S6 kinase (p90RSK) and the transcription factor ELK1,
therefore promoting gene expression99. The Ras–MAPK
pathway is mainly involved in mediating cell growth,
survival and cellular differentiation. Although it has
been postulated that ERK1 and ERK2 have similar
functions, and ERK2 is able to compensate for ERK1
loss in Erk1 knockout mice100, ERK1 has been shown
to be specifically required for adipogenesis in vitro and
in vivo101. ERK1 and ERK2 have also been involved in
a negative-feedback loop of insulin action by phosphorylating IRS1 on serine residues20. Therefore, although
ERK1 and ERK2 might have some of the features of
critical nodes, the preliminary in vivo evidence indicates that these kinases might only be necessary for the
growth and differentiation aspects of insulin actions,
and not the other metabolic effects.
As with many components of signalling networks,
both Ras and the Raf kinases come in several isoforms.
The three isoforms of Ras, H-Ras, N-Ras and K-Ras are
ubiquitously expressed. The different lipid anchors on
the three Ras isoforms have the potential to target them
into different environments and different signalling
complexes102. Also, the p85/p110–PI3K complex binds
to Ras, linking two pathways that are normally considered to be distinct103. The Raf proteins also consist
of three isoforms: A-Raf, B-Raf and C-Raf, which are
differentially regulated104. Although all are able to activate MAPK, there are differences in the duration or the
intensity of activation that might influence the cellular
response104. However, so far, no differential impact on
insulin action has been observed.
Rho family of GTPases. The small GTPases of the Rho
family, Rac and CDC42, have also been implicated
in insulin action. The two Rac isoforms (1 and 2) are
encoded by two separate genes105, whereas the two
CDC42 isoforms are produced by alternative splicing106.
Both Rac and CDC42 are activated by the exchange of
GDP to GTP, which triggers a conformational change
that induces the interaction of the GTPases with downstream effectors, many of which are involved in the
rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton. This property
is thought to link Rac to GLUT4 translocation in skeletal muscle107, whereas CDC42 might have this role in
adipocytes108.
Stress-activated p38 MAPK and JNK. Three JNK-coding
genes (JNK1–3) have been described in mammals,
each with several splice variants. JNK1 and JNK2 are

94 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

expressed ubiquitously, whereas JNK3 expression
is restricted to neuronal tissues109. Insulin has been
shown to activate JNK1 and JNK2 in various cellular
systems22. As mentioned previously, JNK activation
might negatively regulate insulin signalling through
serine phosphorylation of IRS1. Interestingly, JNK
activity has been found to be increased in insulinresistant states, including obesity and inflammation,
and deletion of JNK1, but not JNK2, improves insulin
sensitivity in obese mice24, which indicates a role in the
pathophysiology of disease.
p38 MAPK is also an intracellular target of insulin. The four splice variants of the p38 family (p38α,
β, γ and δ) share 60% identity and have different tissue distribution, with p38α and β being ubiquitously
expressed110. Several studies indicate that p38 MAPK
activation is required for full GLUT4 translocation111,
however, p38 MAPK activation has also been reported
to have contradictory roles in GLUT4 expression in various tissues112. Whether insulin differentially affects the
activation of various isoforms of p38 MAPK, or if these
variants specifically modulate distinct cellular processes,
is unknown.
The CAP–Cbl pathway. The c-Cbl proto-oncogene
is tyrosine-phosphorylated by the IR, and forms a
complex with other molecules such as Cbl-associated
protein (CAP) that results in the activation of the small
GTPase TC10 (REF. 13). It has been suggested that the
CAP–Cbl pathway collaborates with the PI3K pathway
in the stimulation of GLUT4 translocation113, although
this is still being debated. The Cbl family contains the
three members c-Cbl, Cbl-b and Cbl-3 that have been
shown to have a role in the ubiquitylation of receptor
tyrosine kinases114. Interestingly, c-Cbl-deficient mice
have improved insulin sensitivity that is associated with
reduced adiposity and higher energy expenditure115.
Clearly, further investigation is required to determine
the role of Cbl proteins in insulin action.

Conclusions
As our understanding of the genome and proteome
grows, so does the complexity of cell-signalling networks, which underscores the importance of establishing
a framework to define the critical nodes in the system,
and their roles in the network. The insulin-signalling
network illustrates well the concept of critical nodes, as
the molecular relationships between many of its components have been validated using genetic and biochemical
approaches in vitro and in vivo. These studies demonstrate the essential features of a critical node. Critical
nodes consist of several molecular isoforms that are
involved in divergent signalling, they are highly regulated
(both positively and negatively), they are essential for
the biological actions of the ligand, and in many cases,
they are points of crosstalk with other signalling systems.
These nodes allow for the incredible diversification and
fine-tuning of insulin’s signal in normal physiology and
disease states.
The main challenge to validating the critical
nodes of other ligand–receptor systems is the in vivo

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

REVIEWS
elucidation of the exact roles of each component.
Genetic techniques, such as knockout by homologous
recombination, provide one approach to uncovering
the unique biological functions of different signalling isoforms. The use of RNAi might also enable
the rapid assessment of gene-isoform function and

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Avruch, J. Insulin signal transduction through protein
kinase cascades. Mol. Cell Biochem. 182, 31–48
(1998).
Ullrich, A. & Schlessinger, J. Signal transduction by
receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. Cell 61,
203–212 (1990).
Elchebly, M. et al. Increased insulin sensitivity and
obesity resistance in mice lacking the protein tyrosine
phosphatase-1B gene. Science 283, 1544–1548
(1999).
Ueki, K., Kondo, T. & Kahn, C. R. Suppressor of cytokine
signaling 1 (SOCS-1) and SOCS-3 cause insulin
resistance through inhibition of tyrosine
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate proteins
by discrete mechanisms. Mol. Cell Biol. 24,
5434–5446 (2004).
Emanuelli, B. et al. SOCS-3 inhibits insulin signaling
and is up-regulated in response to tumor necrosis
factor-α in the adipose tissue of obese mice. J. Biol.
Chem. 276, 47944–47949 (2001).
Friedman, J. E. et al. Reduced insulin receptor signaling
in the obese spontaneously hypertensive Koletsky rat.
Am. J. Physiol. 273, E1014–E1023 (1997).
Sun, X. J. et al. Structure of the insulin receptor
substrate IRS-1 defines a unique signal transduction
protein. Nature 352, 73–77 (1991).
Sun, X. J. et al. Role of IRS-2 in insulin and cytokine
signalling. Nature 377, 173–177 (1995).
Lavan, B. E., Lane, W. S. & Lienhard, G. E. The 60-kDa
phosphotyrosine protein in insulin-treated adipocytes is
a new member of the insulin receptor substrate family.
J. Biol. Chem. 272, 11439–11443 (1997).
Fantin, V. R. et al. Characterization of insulin receptor
substrate 4 in human embryonic kidney 293 cells.
J. Biol. Chem. 273, 10726–10732 (1998).
Cai, D., Dhe-Paganon, S., Melendez, P. A., Lee, J. &
Shoelson, S. E. Two new substrates in insulin signaling,
IRS5/DOK4 and IRS6/DOK5. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
25323–25330 (2003).
Lehr, S. et al. Identification of major tyrosine
phosphorylation sites in the human insulin receptor
substrate Gab-1 by insulin receptor kinase in vitro.
Biochemistry 39, 10898–10907 (2000).
Baumann, C. A. et al. CAP defines a second
signalling pathway required for insulin-stimulated
glucose transport. Nature 407, 202–207
(2000).
Gustafson, T. A., He, W., Craparo, A., Schaub, C. D. &
O’Neill, T. J. Phosphotyrosine-dependent interaction
of SHC and insulin receptor substrate 1 with the
NPEY motif of the insulin receptor via a novel non-SH2
domain. Mol. Cell Biol. 15, 2500–2508 (1995).
Virkamaki, A., Ueki, K. & Kahn, C. R. Protein–protein
interaction in insulin signaling and the molecular
mechanisms of insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 103,
931–943 (1999).
Myers, M. G. Jr et al. The COOH-terminal tyrosine
phosphorylation sites on IRS-1 bind SHP-2 and
negatively regulate insulin signaling. J. Biol. Chem.
273, 26908–26914 (1998).
Algenstaedt, P., Antonetti, D. A., Yaffe, M. B. &
Kahn, C. R. Insulin receptor substrate proteins create a
link between the tyrosine phosphorylation cascade and
the Ca2+-ATPases in muscle and heart. J. Biol. Chem.
272, 23696–23702 (1997).
Fei, Z. L., D’Ambrosio, C., Li, S., Surmacz, E. &
Baserga, R. Association of insulin receptor substrate 1
with simian virus 40 large T antigen. Mol. Cell Biol. 15,
4232–4239 (1995).
Zick, Y. Ser/Thr phosphorylation of IRS proteins: a
molecular basis for insulin resistance. Sci. STKE 2005,
PE4 (2005).
Bouzakri, K. et al. Reduced activation of
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase and increased serine 636
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 in
primary culture of skeletal muscle cells from patients
with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 52, 1319–1325
(2003).

NATURE REVIEWS | MOLECULAR CELL BIOLOGY

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

regulation, both in vitro 116,117 and in vivo 38,118 , as
could other emergent knockout techniques119. In this
manner, critical-node analysis is not only helpful in
understanding insulin signalling, but will also be a
broadly useful concept in dissecting the biological
effects of all receptor–ligand-mediated processes.

Harrington, L. S. et al. The TSC1–2 tumor suppressor
controls insulin-PI3K signaling via regulation of IRS
proteins. J. Cell Biol. 166, 213–223 (2004).
Miller, B. S. et al. Activation of cJun NH2-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase by insulin.
Biochemistry 35, 8769–8775 (1996).
Cai, D. et al. Local and systemic insulin resistance
resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-β and NF-κB.
Nature Med. 11, 183–190 (2005).
Hirosumi, J. et al. A central role for JNK in obesity and
insulin resistance. Nature 420, 333–336 (2002).
Aguirre, V., Uchida, T., Yenush, L., Davis, R. &
White, M. F. The c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase promotes
insulin resistance during association with insulin
receptor substrate-1 and phosphorylation of Ser(307).
J. Biol. Chem. 275, 9047–9054 (2000).
An important paper that established the connection
between Ser307 phosphorylation, JNK and insulin
resistance.
Craparo, A., Freund, R. & Gustafson, T. A. 14-3-3 (ε)
interacts with the insulin-like growth factor I receptor
and insulin receptor substrate I in a phosphoserinedependent manner. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 11663–11669
(1997).
Bard-Chapeau, E. A. et al. Deletion of Gab1 in the liver
leads to enhanced glucose tolerance and improved hepatic
insulin action. Nature Med. 11, 567–571 (2005).
Hirashima, Y. et al. Insulin down-regulates insulin
receptor substrate-2 expression through the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway.
J. Endocrinol. 179, 253–266 (2003).
Rui, L., Yuan, M., Frantz, D., Shoelson, S. & White, M. F.
SOCS-1 and SOCS-3 block insulin signaling by
ubiquitin-mediated degradation of IRS1 and IRS2.
J. Biol. Chem. 277, 42394–42398 (2002).
Shimomura, I. et al. Decreased IRS-2 and increased
SREBP-1c lead to mixed insulin resistance and
sensitivity in livers of lipodystrophic and ob/ob mice.
Mol. Cell 6, 77–86 (2000).
Sesti, G. et al. Defects of the insulin receptor substrate
(IRS) system in human metabolic disorders. FASEB J.
15, 2099–2111 (2001).
Araki, E. et al. Alternative pathway of insulin signaling
in targeted disruption of the IRS-1 gene. Nature 372,
186–190 (1994).
Kubota, N. et al. Insulin receptor substrate 2 plays a
crucial role in β cells and the hypothalamus. J. Clin.
Invest. 114, 917–927 (2004).
Withers, D. J. et al. Disruption of IRS-2 causes type 2
diabetes in mice. Nature 391, 900–904 (1998).
Tseng, Y. H. et al. Prediction of preadipocyte
differentiation by gene expression reveals role of insulin
receptor substrates and necdin. Nature Cell Biol. 7,
601–611 (2005).
Miki, H. et al. Essential role of insulin receptor
substrate 1 (IRS-1) and IRS-2 in adipocyte
differentiation. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 2521–2532 (2001).
Huang, C., Thirone, A. C., Huang, X. & Klip, A.
Differential contribution of insulin receptor substrates 1
versus 2 to insulin signaling and glucose uptake in l6
myotubes. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 19426–19435 (2005).
Taniguchi, C. M., Ueki, K. & Kahn, R. Complementary
roles of IRS-1 and IRS-2 in the hepatic regulation of
metabolism. J. Clin. Invest. 115, 718–727 (2005).
Sun, X. J. et al. The IRS-2 gene on murine chromosome
8 encodes a unique signaling adapter for insulin and
cytokine action. Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 251–262 (1997).
Miura, A. et al. Insulin substrates 1 and 2 are
corequired for activation of atypical protein kinase C
and Cbl-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
during insulin action in immortalized brown adipocytes.
Biochemistry 43, 15503–15509 (2004).
Tsuruzoe, K., Emkey, R., Kriauciunas, K. M., Ueki, K. &
Kahn, C. R. Insulin receptor substrate 3 (IRS-3) and IRS4 impair IRS-1- and IRS-2-mediated signaling. Mol. Cell
Biol. 21, 26–38 (2001).
Inoue, G., Cheatham, B., Emkey, R. & Kahn, C. R.
Dynamics of insulin signaling in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

Differential compartmentalization and trafficking of
insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and IRS-2. J. Biol.
Chem. 273, 11548–11555 (1998).
Ogihara, T. et al. Insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-2 is
dephosphorylated more rapidly than IRS-1 via its
association with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in skeletal
muscle cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 12868–12873 (1997).
Sawka-Verhelle, D., Tartare-Deckert, S., White, M. F. &
Van Obberghen, E. Insulin receptor substrate-2 binds
to the insulin receptor through its phosphotyrosinebinding domain and through a newly identified domain
comprising amino acids 591–786. J. Biol. Chem. 271,
5980–5983 (1996).
Myers, M. G. Jr et al. IRS-1 activates
phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase by associating with src
homology 2 domains of p85. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
89, 10350–10354 (1992).
Cheatham, B. et al. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
activation is required for insulin stimulation of pp70 S6
kinase, DNA synthesis, and glucose transporter
translocation. Mol. Cell Biol. 14, 4902–4911 (1994).
Alessi, D. R. et al. Characterization of a
3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase which
phosphorylates and activates protein kinase Bα. Curr.
Biol. 7, 261–269 (1997).
Describes the discovery of PDK1.
Le Good, J. A. et al. Protein kinase C isotypes controlled
by phosphoinositide 3-kinase through the protein kinase
PDK1. Science 281, 2042–2045 (1998).
Sarbassov, D. D., Guertin, D. A., Ali, S. M. &
Sabatini, D. M. Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/
PKB by the rictor-mTOR complex. Science 307,
1098–1101 (2005).
Maehama, T. & Dixon, J. E. PTEN: a tumour suppressor
that functions as a phospholipid phosphatase. Trends
Cell Biol. 9, 125–128 (1999).
Wijesekara, N. et al. Muscle-specific Pten deletion
protects against insulin resistance and diabetes.
Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 1135–1145 (2005).
Tang, X., Powelka, A. M., Soriano, N. A., Czech, M. P. &
Guilherme, A. PTEN, but not SHIP2, suppresses insulin
signaling through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt
pathway in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 280,
22523–22529 (2005).
Sleeman, M. W. et al. Absence of the lipid phosphatase
SHIP2 confers resistance to dietary obesity. Nature
Med. 11, 199–205 (2005).
Shepherd, P. R., Withers, D. J. & Siddle, K.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase: the key switch mechanism
in insulin signalling. Biochem. J. 333, 471–490
(1998).
Yu, J. et al. Regulation of the p85/p110
phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase: stabilization and
inhibition of the p110α catalytic subunit by the p85
regulatory subunit. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 1379–1387
(1998).
Helped to define the molecular and functional
relationships between the regulatory and catalytic
subunits of PI3K.
Asano, T. et al. p110β is up-regulated during
differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells and contributes to the
highly insulin-responsive glucose transport activity.
J. Biol. Chem. 275, 17671–17676 (2000).
Tanti, J. F., Gremeaux, T., Van Obberghen, E. &
Le Marchand-Brustel, Y. Insulin receptor substrate 1 is
phosphorylated by the serine kinase activity of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Biochem. J. 304, 17–21
(1994).
Tanti, J. F., Gremeaux, T., van Obberghen, E. &
Le Marchand-Brustel, Y. Serine/threonine
phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1
modulates insulin receptor signaling. J. Biol. Chem.
269, 6051–6057 (1994).
Antonetti, D. A., Algenstaedt, P. & Kahn, C. R.
Insulin receptor substrate 1 binds two novel splice
variants of the regulatory subunit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in muscle and brain.
Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 2195–2203 (1996).

VOLUME 7 | FEBRUARY 2006 | 95

REVIEWS
60. Ueki, K. et al. Increased insulin sensitivity in mice
lacking p85β subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 419–424 (2002).
61. Terauchi, Y. et al. Increased insulin sensitivity and
hypoglycaemia in mice lacking the p85 α subunit of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Nature Genet. 21,
230–235 (1999).
The first description of the paradoxical negative
regulation of insulin signalling by the regulatory
subunit p85α.
62. Chen, D. et al. p50α/p55α phosphoinositide 3-kinase
knockout mice exhibit enhanced insulin sensitivity.
Mol. Cell Biol. 24, 320–329 (2004).
63. Fruman, D. A. et al. Hypoglycaemia, liver necrosis and
perinatal death in mice lacking all isoforms of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase p85 α. Nature Genet. 26,
379–382 (2000).
64. Mauvais-Jarvis, F. et al. Reduced expression of the
murine p85α subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
improves insulin signaling and ameliorates diabetes.
J. Clin. Invest. 109, 141–149 (2002).
65. Barbour, L. A. et al. Human placental growth hormone
increases expression of the p85 regulatory unit of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and triggers severe
insulin resistance in skeletal muscle. Endocrinology
145, 1144–1150 (2004).
Shows that the physiologic upregulation of p85α
in vivo induces insulin resistance.
66. Bandyopadhyay, G. K., Yu, J. G., Ofrecio, J. &
Olefsky, J. M. Increased p85/55/50 expression and
decreased phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity in
insulin-resistant human skeletal muscle. Diabetes 54,
2351–2359 (2005).
67. Ueki, K., Algenstaedt, P., Mauvais-Jarvis, F. & Kahn, C. R.
Positive and negative regulation of phosphoinositide
3-kinase-dependent signaling pathways by three
different gene products of the p85α regulatory subunit.
Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 8035–8046 (2000).
68. Luo, J., Field, S. J., Lee, J. Y., Engelman, J. A. & Cantley,
L. C. The p85 regulatory subunit of phosphoinositide
3-kinase down-regulates IRS-1 signaling via the
formation of a sequestration complex. J. Cell Biol. 170,
455–464 (2005).
69. Ueki, K. et al. Positive and negative roles of p85 α and
p85 β regulatory subunits of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
in insulin signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 48453–48466
(2003).
The first published connection between the p85α
regulatory subunit and JNK activation.
70. Carpenter, C. L. & Cantley, L. C. Phosphoinositide
kinases. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8, 153–158 (1996).
71. Fang, D. & Liu, Y. C. Proteolysis-independent regulation
of PI3K by Cbl-b-mediated ubiquitination in T cells.
Nature Immunol. 2, 870–875 (2001).
72. Zheng, Y., Bagrodia, S. & Cerione, R. A. Activation of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity by Cdc42Hs binding
to p85. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 18727–18730 (1994).
73. Cross, D. A., Alessi, D. R., Cohen, P., Andjelkovich, M. &
Hemmings, B. A. Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase3 by insulin mediated by protein kinase B. Nature 378,
785–789 (1995).
74. Frame, S. & Cohen, P. GSK3 takes centre stage more
than 20 years after its discovery. Biochem. J. 359,
1–16 (2001).
75. Sano, H. et al. Insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of a
Rab GTPase-activating protein regulates GLUT4
translocation. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 14599–14602
(2003).
76. Harris, T. E. & Lawrence, J. C. Jr. TOR signaling. Sci.
STKE 2003, RE15 (2003).
77. Tran, H., Brunet, A., Griffith, E. C. & Greenberg, M. E.
The many forks in FOXO’s road. Sci. STKE 2003, RE5
(2003).
78. Puigserver, P. et al. Insulin-regulated hepatic
gluconeogenesis through FOXO1–PGC-1α interaction.
Nature 423, 550–555 (2003).
79. Nakae, J. et al. The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1
regulates adipocyte differentiation. Dev. Cell 4,
119–129 (2003).
80. Wolfrum, C., Asilmaz, E., Luca, E., Friedman, J. M. &
Stoffel, M. Foxa2 regulates lipid metabolism and
ketogenesis in the liver during fasting and in diabetes.
Nature 432, 1027–1032 (2004).
81. Brazil, D. P., Yang, Z. Z. & Hemmings, B. A. Advances in
protein kinase B signalling: AKTion on multiple fronts.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 29, 233–242 (2004).
82. Gao, T., Furnari, F. & Newton, A. C. PHLPP: a
phosphatase that directly dephosphorylates Akt,
promotes apoptosis, and suppresses tumor growth.
Mol. Cell 18, 13–24 (2005).

96 | FEBRUARY 2006 | VOLUME 7

83. Du, K., Herzig, S., Kulkarni, R. N. & Montminy, M.
TRB3: a tribbles homolog that inhibits Akt/PKB
activation by insulin in liver. Science 300, 1574–1577
(2003).
84. Koo, S. H. et al. PGC-1 promotes insulin resistance in
liver through PPAR-α-dependent induction of TRB-3.
Nature Med. 10, 530–534 (2004).
85. Chen, W. S. et al. Growth retardation and increased
apoptosis in mice with homozygous disruption of the
Akt1 gene. Genes Dev. 15, 2203–2208 (2001).
86. Cho, H., Thorvaldsen, J. L., Chu, Q., Feng, F. &
Birnbaum, M. J. Akt1/PKBα is required for normal
growth but dispensable for maintenance of glucose
homeostasis in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 276,
38349–38352 (2001).
87. Cho, H. et al. Insulin resistance and a diabetes mellituslike syndrome in mice lacking the protein kinase Akt2
(PKBβ). Science 292, 1728–1731 (2001).
88. George, S. et al. A family with severe insulin resistance
and diabetes due to a mutation in AKT2. Science 304,
1325–1328 (2004).
89. Tschopp, O. et al. Essential role of protein kinase B γ
(PKB γ/Akt3) in postnatal brain development but not in
glucose homeostasis. Development 132, 2943–2954
(2005).
90. Chan, T. O., Rittenhouse, S. E. & Tsichlis, P. N. AKT/PKB
and other D3 phosphoinositide-regulated kinases:
kinase activation by phosphoinositide-dependent
phosphorylation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 965–1014
(1999).
91. Bae, S. S., Cho, H., Mu, J. & Birnbaum, M. J. Isoformspecific regulation of insulin-dependent glucose uptake
by Akt/protein kinase B. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
49530–49536 (2003).
92. Jiang, Z. Y. et al. Insulin signaling through Akt/protein
kinase B analyzed by small interfering RNA-mediated
gene silencing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
7569–7574 (2003).
93. Calera, M. R. et al. Insulin increases the association of
Akt-2 with Glut4-containing vesicles. J. Biol. Chem.
273, 7201–7204 (1998).
94. Yamada, E. et al. Akt2 phosphorylates Synip to regulate
docking and fusion of GLUT4-containing vesicles. J. Cell
Biol. 168, 921–928 (2005).
95. Masure, S. et al. Molecular cloning, expression and
characterization of the human serine/threonine kinase
Akt-3. Eur. J. Biochem. 265, 353–360 (1999).
96. Standaert, M. L., Bandyopadhyay, G., Kanoh, Y., Sajan,
M. P. & Farese, R. V. Insulin and PIP3 activate PKC-ζ by
mechanisms that are both dependent and independent
of phosphorylation of activation loop (T410) and
autophosphorylation (T560) sites. Biochemistry 40,
249–255 (2001).
97. Farese, R. V. Function and dysfunction of aPKC isoforms
for glucose transport in insulin-sensitive and insulinresistant states. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
283, E1–E11 (2002).
98. Farese, R. V., Sajan, M. P. & Standaert, M. L. Atypical
protein kinase C in insulin action and insulin resistance.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 33, 350–353 (2005).
99. Pouyssegur, J., Volmat, V. & Lenormand, P. Fidelity and
spatio-temporal control in MAP kinase (ERKs)
signalling. Biochem. Pharmacol. 64, 755–763
(2002).
100. Pages, G. et al. Defective thymocyte maturation in p44
MAP kinase (Erk 1) knockout mice. Science 286,
1374–1377 (1999).
101. Bost, F. et al. The extracellular signal-regulated kinase
isoform ERK1 is specifically required for in vitro and
in vivo adipogenesis. Diabetes 54, 402–411 (2005).
102. Hancock, J. F. & Parton, R. G. Ras plasma membrane
signalling platforms. Biochem. J. 389, 1–11 (2005).
103. Rodriguez-Viciana, P. et al. Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH
kinase as a direct target of Ras. Nature 370, 527–532
(1994).
104. Wellbrock, C., Karasarides, M. & Marais, R. The RAF
proteins take centre stage. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
5, 875–885 (2004).
105. Matos, P. et al. Small GTPase Rac1: structure,
localization, and expression of the human gene.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 277, 741–751
(2000).
106. Marks, P. W. & Kwiatkowski, D. J. Genomic organization
and chromosomal location of murine Cdc42. Genomics
38, 13–18 (1996).
107. Marcusohn, J., Isakoff, S. J., Rose, E., Symons, M. &
Skolnik, E. Y. The GTP-binding protein Rac does not
couple PI 3-kinase to insulin-stimulated glucose
transport in adipocytes. Curr. Biol. 5, 1296–1302
(1995).

108. Usui, I., Imamura, T., Huang, J., Satoh, H. & Olefsky, J. M.
Cdc42 is a Rho GTPase family member that can
mediate insulin signaling to glucose transport in 3T3-L1
adipocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 13765–13774 (2003).
109. Ip, Y. T. & Davis, R. J. Signal transduction by the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) — from inflammation to
development. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10, 205–219 (1998).
110. Zarubin, T. & Han, J. Activation and signaling of the
p38 MAP kinase pathway. Cell Res. 15, 11–18 (2005).
111. Furtado, L. M., Somwar, R., Sweeney, G., Niu, W. & Klip,
A. Activation of the glucose transporter GLUT4 by
insulin. Biochem. Cell Biol. 80, 569–578 (2002).
112. Carlson, C. J., Koterski, S., Sciotti, R. J., Poccard, G. B.
& Rondinone, C. M. Enhanced basal activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases in adipocytes from
type 2 diabetes: potential role of p38 in the
downregulation of GLUT4 expression. Diabetes 52,
634–641 (2003).
113. Chiang, S. H. et al. TCGAP, a multidomain Rho GTPaseactivating protein involved in insulin-stimulated glucose
transport. EMBO J. 22, 2679–2691 (2003).
114. Thien, C. B. & Langdon, W. Y. Cbl: many adaptations to
regulate protein tyrosine kinases. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2, 294–307 (2001).
115. Molero, J. C. et al. c-Cbl-deficient mice have reduced
adiposity, higher energy expenditure, and improved
peripheral insulin action. J. Clin. Invest. 114,
1326–1333 (2004).
116. Zhou, Q. L. et al. Analysis of insulin signalling by RNAibased gene silencing. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32,
817–821 (2004).
117. Stegmeier, F., Hu, G., Rickles, R. J., Hannon, G. J. &
Elledge, S. J. A lentiviral microRNA-based system for
single-copy polymerase II-regulated RNA interference in
mammalian cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102,
13212–13217 (2005).
118. Shinagawa, T. & Ishii, S. Generation of Ski-knockdown
mice by expressing a long double-strand RNA from an
RNA polymerase II promoter. Genes Dev. 17,
1340–1345 (2003).
119. Ding, S. et al. Efficient transposition of the piggyBac
(PB) transposon in mammalian cells and mice. Cell 122,
473–483 (2005).
120. Becker, A. B. & Roth, R. A. Insulin receptor structure
and function in normal and pathological conditions.
Annu. Rev. Med. 41, 99–115 (1990).
121. Goren, H. J., White, M. F. & Kahn, C. R. Separate
domains of the insulin receptor contain sites of
autophosphorylation and tyrosine kinase activity.
Biochemistry 26, 2374–2382 (1987).
122. Sesti, G. et al. Tissue-specific expression of two
alternatively spliced isoforms of the human insulin
receptor protein. Acta Diabetol. 31, 59–65 (1994).
123. Yamaguchi, Y. et al. Functional properties of two
naturally occurring isoforms of the human insulin
receptor in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Endocrinology
129, 2058–2066 (1991).
124. Leibiger, B. et al. Selective insulin signaling through A
and B insulin receptors regulates transcription of insulin
and glucokinase genes in pancreatic β cells. Mol. Cell 7,
559–570 (2001).
125. Bhalla, U. S. & Iyengar, R. Emergent properties of
networks of biological signaling pathways. Science 283,
381–387 (1999).

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants,
and a Joslin Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center grant
(to C.R.K.). C.M.T. acknowledges support from the American
Diabetes Association Medical Scholars Award and the Medical
Scientist Training Program (Harvard Medical School). B.E. was
supported by a National Institutes of Health grant. We apologize
to the authors whose work could not be cited in this review due
to space limitations, but appreciate all of the many contributions
to the large body of literature we have tried to summarize here.

Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

DATABASES
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
UniProtKB: http://us.expasy.org
AKT1 | AKT2 | AKT3 | Cbl | FOXO1 | GLUT4 | Grb2 | Grb10 | IRS1 |
IRS2 | JNK1 | JNK2 | JNK3 | PTEN | PTP1B | SHIP2 | SOCS1 | SOCS3

FURTHER INFORMATION
C. Ronald Kahn’s homepage: http://www.joslinresearch.org/
PINET/InvestigatorDetail.asp?InvestigatorID=5
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

www.nature.com/reviews/molcellbio

